docs/design: Initial import design document (#130)
hashicorp/terraform-plugin-framework: docs/design/import.md

# Import

> Practitioners may have previously existing resources that they wish to bring under Terraform'm management. Conceptually, this is called importing as Terraform must create the state of the resource. Providers are responsible for receiving a request for resource import and respond with the relevant resource state(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Practitioners may have previously existing resources that they wish to bring under Terraform's management. Conceptually, this is called importing as Terraform must create the state of the resource. Providers are responsible for receiving a request for resource import and respond with the relevant resource state(s).
```

This design documentation will walk through and recommend options for import handling in the framework.

## Background

### Terraform CLI

> Terraform CLI supports two forms of interacting with unmanaged resources:

Reviewer 2: nitpick

```suggestion
Terraform CLI supports two forms of interacting with resources not in its statefile:
```

"unmanaged" here may be confusing. Does it mean data sources? etc.

> - [`terraform add`](https://www.terraform.io/docs/cli/commands/add.html) (*Experimental*, Terraform CLI version 1.1.0 and later): Given a resource address and using the resource schema provided by the provider, generate a configuration template.

Author: This isn't live yet, so could switch it to something like https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform/blob/43d753e727c4248e8d5bf8a703b1937f75c55c76/website/docs/cli/commands/add.html.md, if desired.

Reviewer 2: I think leaving it as it is is probably fine, I don't think it will matter soon (for some value of "soon", I have no idea when 1.1 is planned for).

- [`terraform import`](https://www.terraform.io/docs/cli/commands/import.html) (Terraform CLI version 0.7.0 and later): Given a resource address and (currently only) an identifier, forwards the request to the relevant provider and expects relevant resource state(s) with enough information to perform a refresh, then performs that resource refresh to ensure the resource state is fully populated.

Since `add` uses already available schema information and does not require additional provider interaction, this design focuses on the latter, which is a currently unimplemented integration point for providers in the framework.

### Terraform Plugin Protocol

The protocol defines the following implementation details for import handling:

```protobuf
service Provider {
    // ... other RPCs ...
    rpc ImportResourceState(ImportResourceState.Request) returns (ImportResourceState.Response);
}

message ImportResourceState {
    message Request {
        string type_name = 1;

>         string id = 2;

Reviewer 2: It may be helpful somewhere to call out how practitioners see this, e.g.,

```sh
$ terraform import $ADDRESS $ID
```

and to talk about what the ID is/needs to be (i.e., enough information to identify the resource or resources in the API).

Author: Will be included in next commit. 👍

// directly to the ID format that the resource expects, so that should
// be validated.
//
// This should return a slice of ResourceData that turn into the state
// that was imported. This might be as simple as returning only the argument
// that was given to the function. In other cases (such as AWS security groups),
// an import may fan out to multiple resources and this will have to return
// multiple.
//
// To create the ResourceData structures for other resource types (if
// you have to), instantiate your resource and call the Data function.
type StateContextFunc func(context.Context, *ResourceData, interface{}) ([]*ResourceData, error)
```

When defined, the resource could respond to the `ImportResource` RPC, otherwise an error was returned that the resource does not support import.

If the resource state could be entirely fetched using an import identifier that matched the resource identifier, the `ImportStatePassthrough` and `ImportStatePassthroughContext` helpers simplified provider implementations, e.g.

```go
Importer: &schema.ResourceImporter{
    State: schema.ImportStatePassthrough,
},
```

Otherwise, custom provider implementations were required.

## Caveats

> Terraform supports the ability to import multiple resource states during a single import (for example, resource import of an `aws_s3_bucket` also imports any associated `aws_s3_bucket_policy`), however almost all resources in the Terraform ecosystem with import support implement a 1:1 import. The extremely uncommon multiple resource support in practice is likely due to:

Reviewer 2: This last sentence

> The extremely uncommon multiple resource support in practice is likely due to:

sounded to me like a list of reasons why people would want to do that was going to follow, but it looks like a list of why that's a bad idea to do? Or why it's hard to use? I'm not clear.

- Risk of resource destruction for incorrect implementations ([example issue reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-aws/issues/6036)).
- Pracitioners may not have required permissions or wish to manage secondary imported resources ([example issue reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-aws/issues/9508)).

> - Providers must define the resource addresses for secondary resources, which may not match practitioner desires and require additional action such as `state mv` ([example issue reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-aws/issues/9001)).

Reviewer 2: This feels like an important thing to call out. How does this work currently? It sounds like the provider can supply the resource address, but I'm not clear on how. Can we tease out this bit a little more to be more concrete about what the state of the world is right now?

Author: The latest commit now includes lots more information about multiple resource import including what Terraform CLI does implicitly with resource addresses and some examples of how support was implemented in the previous framework. 👍

- (Previously) Risk of resource destruction for missing configurations ([example issue reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-aws/issues/9001)).
- (Previously) Terraform CLI unable to refresh secondary resource states using the correct provider instance ([example issue reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-aws/issues/394)).

> 

Reviewer 2: Not really, Google didn't do this as much.

## Goals

Import support in this framework should be:

- Able to support diagnostics and cancellation contexts.
- Available as exported functionality for provider developers.
- Abstracted from terraform-plugin-go and convertable into those types to separate implementation concerns.
- Ergonomic to implement Go code (e.g. have helper methods for common use cases).

Additional consideration should be given to:

- Whether implementations must return a partial or full state, since Terraform CLI currently implements a full resource refresh.
- Accessing the provider instance (e.g. imports that may require additional remote information).
- Returning multiple resource states.
- Potential future `terraform import` capabilities (e.g. configuration-based import).

## Proposals

These proposals are split into sections based on separate design considerations.

### Defining Resource Import Support

#### ResourceType Interface

The framework can provide an extension interface type on the existing `ResourceType`:

```go
// ResourceTypeWithImportState represents a resource type with import support.
type ResourceTypeWithImportState interface {
    ResourceType

>     ImportState(context.Context, ImportResourceStateRequest, *ImportResourceStateResponse)

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth weighing the pros/cons of making import required.

Author: It didn't actually take too much convincing myself, but I actually really like the idea of requiring implementation on `Resource` assuming we offer an easy opt-out (e.g. return error diagnostic helper). I have added a new commit with this new proposal idea and recommending it. 🥲
